After the end of the Cold War and the disruption of the Soviet Union, the previous characterization of the world lost its initial meaning. Nowadays the term of the First World characterize highly industrialized capitalist countries, like the U.S. Western Europe, Japan, and Australia. The Second World is the identification of the nations that was included into the Soviet Union, as well as China. The Third World today contains the so-called developing nations of Africa, Asia, and Latin America. In addition, it has to be noted that the Third World counties, despite the counterparts from the ‘first’ and ‘second’ worlds, have variety of political structures.

For example, Venezuela is a capitalist country and North Korea is a communistic state, but both of them are considered the nations of the Third World. Nevertheless, it is also important to clarify that the Third World nations are characterized as such not only due to problems in economy. Such factors as high infant mortality, high poverty level, low use of natural resources, serious dependence on industrialized countries, lack of civil liberties, absence of freedom of information, and stagnation in human development identify a country as the Third World nation.

Despite the fact that in the past a wealthy Third World nation can be characterized as such, where Saudi Arabia is the most vivid example, nowadays the term Third World is a collective notion for the developing nations. In addition to the fact that the term is an outdated characteristic, it also multiplies misconception about the developing countries. The core reason is that experts still perceive the struggling nations as one entity, while the Third World is extremely differentiated.

Each country has certain issues and it is rather difficult to analyze the entire Third World using the same methods and tools. In addition to the internal and external economic policies, the researchers pointed to the fast and constant growth of the world population. Increasing in numbers, more people needed more resources as well as the proper policies granting their normal living. The explosion of population in the Third World usually prevents the implementation of the improvements.

At the same time, the situation with the Third World, as relating to the term in the modern meaning, has been changing over the years. Litonjua marked the period of paradigm shift that in the researcher’s point of view has generated in the beginning of 60s with the decolonization. Particularly, the author reminds about the development project initiated by the U.S. and the United Nations. On December 19, 1961, on a proposal by the U.S. President, the U.N. General Assembly“designated the decade as the United Nations Development Decade, during which it urged its member-nations to intensify efforts, to mobilize and sustain support for measures that would accelerate progress towards self-sustaining growth of underdeveloped countries” (Litonjua 107).
